[soft music playing]
[soft piano music playing]
[indistinct chatter]
[boys mimicking airplane engine rumbling]
[boys laughing]
[indistinct chatter]
[tender music playing]
[birds chirping]
[boys mimicking airplane engine rumbling]
[boys laughing]
[music continues]
Move! Move it! Move, move! Go!
Move!
[soldier] Now!
-Move! Come on!
-[dogs barking]
Get up!
-[soldiers shouting]
-[car engine rumbling]
[dogs barking]
[boys mimicking airplane engine rumbling]
[boys] Bye, Bruno!
[Elsa] Hello, sweetheart.
Mum, what's going on?
-We're celebrating.
-[Bruno] Celebrating?
-Your father's been given a promotion.
-[music fades]
That means a better job.
I know what promotion is.
So, we're having a little party
to celebrate.
He's still going to be a soldier,
though, isn't he?
Yes, my love. Yes.
Just a more important one now.
There's some even more exciting news,
but I think Dad wanted
to tell you about that himself.
Moving? Where to?
To the countryside.
That's miles away
What about Karl and Leon and Martin?
Sweetheart, I know it's hard,
but we're all having to say goodbye
to our friends for the time being.
Anyway, we'll make new ones
where we're going. Won't we?
Of course, you will.
You'll make lots of new friends.
Bruno, you can have your friends around
in the morning before we go.
Think of it as an adventure
like in one of your books.
But this is the best house ever.
[sighs] Well, you never know.
The house we're going to
might be even better.
-Hmm. Dad says it's got a garden.
-Mm-hmm.
Look, the thing is, Bruno,
the thing about being a soldier,
is that life is not so much about choices,
it's more about duty.
So, if your country needs you
to go somewhere, you'll go.
Now, of course, going somewhere else
is much easier
when you know that your family
are so delighted to go with you.
-[instrumental music playing]
-[guests laughing]
[indistinct chatter]
[guests laughing]
[chuckles] Bruno! You're getting bigger
every time I see you.
It's only been a week, Nathalie.
Oh, well.
Perhaps it's me that's getting smaller.
-[both laugh]
-[Bruno chuckles]
So, you two, well,
what do you think of all this, hmm?
Moving out of Berlin?
Well, Mommy and Daddy say
it's a good thing.
-So, I suppose it must be.
-Mm. Hmm.
Children, be angels, will you?
Pass some food around.
[guests applauding]
[guests] Heil Hitler!
[guests cheer]
[music concludes]
-[whimsical music playing]
-[indistinct chatter]
[guest] Congratulations.
Doesn't he look wonderful?
Absolutely.
Oh. I'm so proud of you, my boy.
Oh, dear. I sometimes wonder
if this is all down to me,
making you those costumes
for your little plays when you were tiny.
-You used to adore all that dressing up.
-Now, Nathalie…
Does it still make you feel special,
Ralf dear?
The uniform, and what it stands for?
Mother, it's a party.
Let's not spoil things.
[scoffs] Me, spoil things? [scoffs]
You should be careful.
Airing your views so publicly
could land you in trouble. You know that.
[scoffs]
Oh. So, uh, how long
are we losing you for, my boy?
Until the war is won, I would think.
Well, not so long then.
-Hmm? [laughs]
-["Smile When You Say Goodbye" playing]
[singer] ♪ You've got to smile
When you say goodbye ♪
♪ You've got to smile as the days go by ♪
♪ And all the time that you're away
I'm thinking of you ♪
♪ I'll write and say from day to day
How much I love you ♪
♪ You've got to smile
When you say goodbye ♪
Till the clouds roll by ♪
♪ So, till we meet again, say cheerio ♪
♪ And then give me a smile
When you say goodbye ♪
[boys laugh]
[imitates gunshots]
-[boys imitate gunshots]
-[groans]
[Elsa] Bruno!
All right, Bruno.
Time to say goodbye.
[song fades]
[melancholic music playing]
-Bye-bye.
-[boys] Bye-bye!
[boys mimicking airplane engine rumbling]
[music concludes]
[tender music playing]
[Gretel] Time has come for me to sleep.
Lord, I thank thee for thy keep.
Watch this night well over me,
and teach me, Lord, to trust in thee.
Care for children, sick and poor.
Grant them, Lord, thy blessing more.
And this I pray in Jesus' name,
care for my family just the same. Amen.
[train whistle blowing]
[birds chirping]
Children, look. Look! Our new home.
[music concludes]
[tense music playing]
[indistinct chatter]
[tense music concludes]
I have some business to take care of.
I'll see you shortly.
[door closes]
Well, what do we think?
Hmm? Oh, come on. It's lovely.
You two choose your rooms.
I'll have Maria come and…
help you unpack. [sighs]
[sighs]
What do you think of it, Maria?
The new house.
Well, it's not for me to say.
But it won't feel like home
until we make it feel like home, will it?
[footsteps approaching]
[whispering] Who was that?
[whispering]
One of your father's soldiers, I suppose.
[whispering] He looked very serious.
[whispering] Well, they are, aren't they?
[whispering] Why are we whispering?
[whispering] I don't know.
[chuckles softly]
[ominous music playing]
[Elsa] And play with who?
The children over on the farm.
Farm? I didn't see a farm.
And that one too.
-You can only see it from my room.
-Oh. And there are some children there?
-Yes, quite a few.
-Well, that's good.
So, I'll be able to play with them.
I don't see why not.
I'll wait a little bit,
just to see what they're like,
because they look a bit strange.
[chuckles] The children do?
Well, and the farmers.
What sort of strange?
[door opens]
I'm sorry.
Vegetables.
There.
Bruno, have you unpacked everything?
Because I think you should go back
upstairs and finish off.
Thank you, ma'am.
[Elsa] Bruno.
I told you they were strange.
-Who?
-The farmers.
They wear pajamas.
[footsteps approaching]
[music concludes]
Oh, Bruno, I was just coming
to look for you.
Well, thank you for that.
That was extremely useful.
-I'll be over to see you later.
-Of course, Herr Kommandant.
[Ralf] Come in.
Sit down, sit down.
Well, what do you think?
Oh, dear.
I want to go home.
You are home, Bruno.
Home is where the family is.
Isn't that right?
Bruno, you have to at least give
the place a chance.
I promise you,
it won't be long before you--
Why do the farmers wear pajamas?
I can see them from my window.
The thing is, Bruno…
those people…
Well, you see,
they're not really people at all.
[footsteps approaching]
Bruno, who told you it was a farm?
Was it Maria?
[Bruno] No.
It is a farm, isn't it?
[Elsa] Yes.
[Bruno] Is it to do with your new job?
All you need to know
about my work here, Bruno,
is that it's very important
to our country, and to you.
We're working very hard to make this world
a better place for you to grow up in.
But you're not a farmer. You're a soldier.
Bruno, can you come and help me finish
sorting out in the kitchen?
I can still play with them, though?
The children.
[Elsa] I don't think so, Bruno. No. I…
Like you say, they're a bit strange.
A bit, um…
Well, they're different.
Don't worry, my darling. [kisses]
We'll find you some new friends,
but they won't be the ones from the farm.
Ralf, you promised.
You said it was miles away.
It is. How was I to know he could see it
from the bedroom window?
There was one of them in our kitchen.
-[sighs]
-[page rustling]
[instrumental music playing]
[pen scrapes]
[birds chirping]
[clicks tongue, sighs]
[music concludes]
[Bruno chuckles]
[footsteps approaching]
-Master Bruno, how are you today?
-Fed up.
Oh. You said the same thing
every day for two whole weeks.
[Bruno] It's true.
-[Maria] Well, you should be out playing.
-Playing with who?
-I don't know. Gretel?
-[blows raspberries]
[sighs] Well, you can make your own fun.
That's what I'm trying to do.
One thing's for sure.
Sitting around being miserable
won't make things any happier.
[Bruno mimicking airplane engine rumbling]
[instrumental music playing]
[music concludes]
-[gasps]
-[Elsa] Bruno, what are you doing?
-[Bruno] Exploring.
-No! No, not in the back.
I told you, it's out of bounds.
Explore at the front.
But I've explored it all.
-Well, find something else to do.
-Like what?
Come back in now,
and we'll think of something.
[waltz music playing]
-[radio static]
-[soft music playing]
[cutlery clinking]
So, children, what are you doing today?
Same as yesterday.
-[Ralf] And what was that?
-Same as the day before.
Except you went exploring.
I like exploring.
[Ralf] Where did you go?
I wanted to look in the back garden,
but Mom wouldn't let me.
The back garden?
Well, God forbid. [scoffs]
I expect you'll be missing
those friends of yours.
I even miss school.
[chuckles]
Well, I never thought
I'd hear you say that.
-Anyway, you won't be missing it for long.
-Really?
[Ralf] I've arranged a tutor for you both.
A Herr Liszt
will be visiting twice a week.
[Bruno] So, we're not going to school?
-School's coming here?
-[Ralf] Mm-hmm.
On an old bicycle, I gather.
[Elsa] Hmm.
-[birds chirping]
-[soft music playing]
-[whispering] It's a poem about you.
-Hmm.
[giggles]
[water splashes]
[music concludes]
-[sighs]
-Good morning, little man.
And how are you this morning?
Can I ask you a favor?
-[Kurt] Well, you can ask.
-[Gretel chuckles]
Are there any spare tires around?
An old one from one
of the trucks or something?
Well, the only spare tire
I've seen around here
belongs to Lieutenant Meinberg.
[Gretel chuckling]
Well, is he using it?
Yes, he's very attached to it.
[Gretel chuckling]
[sighs] Oh, stop it.
He doesn't understand. He's only eight.
You're only 12.
So, stop pretending you're any older.
What do you want a tire for anyway?
-I want to make a swing.
-A swing?
That does sound exciting.
You!
[dog barking]
Here, now.
Move!
[dog barking]
Take this boy to the outhouse
in the back garden.
There are some tires in there.
He will select one.
You will carry it where he asks.
Do you understand?
[footsteps receding]
Well, little man,
what are you waiting for?
[tense music playing]
[flies buzzing]
How about this one?
[rope creaking]
-[groans]
-[body thuds]
[music fades]
[footsteps approaching]
Where's my mum?
Uh. She's out.
-When is she back?
-Soon, I expect.
But don't worry.
But I might bleed to death.
No, you won't.
[scissor snapping]
-[Bruno] Will I need to go to hospital?
-No.
It's only a small cut.
[inhales sharply]
Oh, come on. It's not that bad.
There.
All better.
-[box clatters]
-What's your name?
Pavel.
Now, you've got to sit still
for a few minutes
before you start walking around
on that again.
[Bruno] Will you tell my mum
what happened?
I think she's going to see it for herself.
She'll probably take me to a doctor.
[Pavel] I don't think so.
It could be worse than it looks.
It isn't.
[Bruno] How would you know?
You're not a doctor.
Yes, I am.
No, you're not. You peel potatoes.
I practiced as a doctor, before I…
before I came here.
You couldn't have been much good then
if you had to practice.
[soft music playing]
Now…
what are you going to be when you grow up?
I know.
An explorer.
How do you know that?
Is it nice on the farm?
[footsteps approaching]
Bruno. Bruno, what happened to you?
I made a swing,
but I fell off it and cut my knee.
But Pavel here, he carried me in
and put a bandage on it.
-Go to your room.
-But Pavel says I--
Don't argue. Go to your room.
[object rustling]
[potatoes scraping]
Thank you.
[music concludes]
[waltz music playing]
[Bruno] It's not fair,
you having this view.
[Gretel] Well, I'm not swapping.
[bicycle horn dings]
[dog barks in distance]
I think school's here.
[Liszt] No, I mean, more recent history.
Are you interested in… in current affairs?
Yes, very.
So, you'll be aware of the situation
in which our great nation
presently finds itself.
Yes. I read newspapers whenever I can,
and one of Father's men keeps me up
to date on everything that's happening.
Good. And you, Bruno?
Have you been reading newspapers?
Have you been reading anything?
Books.
Good. What sort of books?
Adventure books, mainly.
You know, knights in shining armor,
exploring strange lands and stuff.
And silly princesses
always getting in the way.
Ah. Well, this is why I'm here to help.
You're how old now, Bruno? Eight?
Time to get your head out
of those fiction books
and start learning about fact.
Time, I think,
to turn your mind to the real world,
and I believe
this would be the perfect start.
[truck engines rumbling]
[men singing]
[suspenseful music playing]
[grunts softly]
[birds squawking]
[Bruno neighs]
Die, die! [grunts, neighs]
Die. Die!
-[indistinct chatter]
-[music concludes]
[gasps]
Hello.
I'm exploring.
What are you doing?
We're… we're building a new hut.
[Bruno] Have you got
lots of friends over there?
[Shmuel] A few.
But we fight a lot.
That's why I like being out here.
I can be on my own.
I'm Bruno.
-Shmuel.
-[Bruno] Sorry?
I'm Shmuel.
That's your name?
Never heard of anyone called that before.
I've never heard of anyone called Bruno.
But Shmuel. No one's called Shmuel.
I live in the house back there.
-Have you got any food on you?
-[Bruno] No.
-Are you hungry?
-Hmm.
[men shouting]
How old are you?
-Eight.
-Me too!
It's not fair, me being stuck
over here on my own,
while you're over there
playing with friends all day.
-Playing?
-Well, that number.
-Isn't it a part of a game or something?
-It's just my number.
-Everyone gets given a different number.
-[Bruno] Oh.
-Right. Then what happens?
-[man shouting]
-[whistle blowing]
-[gasps]
I have to go back now.
-Really?
-Yeah.
It was nice to meet you, Shmuel.
And you, Bruno.
[soldier] Come on! Come back!
[whispering] Bye.
Mum, I can't find my football.
Well, it'll be in one of your cupboards,
sweet.
It isn't. I've looked.
Can I have a piece of chocolate?
Mm-hmm. A piece. Yes.
Bruno? Have you looked in the cellar?
-The cellar?
-For your football.
Oh.
[tense music playing]
-[object clatters]
-[Bruno] Damn.
[switch clicks]
Gretel, I've just seen all your…
All my what?
All your dolls down in the cellar.
Dolls are for little girls.
It's not right to play with silly toys
while people are away risking
their lives for the Fatherland.
[whistle blows]
[music concludes]
[electricity crackles]
-"My people's density is my density."
-Destiny.
"Its struggles and its sorrows,
its joys and its miseries are mine."
"I must work and create
for the resurrection of my Fatherland."
"The history of my people
is great and glorious."
And it's twelve o'clock.
I'm sorry?
Isn't that when we finish?
The termination of the lesson
is for the tutor
to decide, Bruno, not the pupil.
Now, will you please continue.
Oh, Bruno, there you are.
I'm just going into town for an hour.
Do you want to come?
You be careful on that thing.
-Thank you.
-[car door closes]
-[car door shuts]
-[car engine revving]
[Bruno] Can I ask you something?
Why do you people wear pajamas all day?
They're not pajamas.
Well, those.
We have to.
They took all our other clothes away.
-[Bruno] Who did?
-The soldiers.
[Bruno] The soldiers? Why?
I don't like soldiers. Do you?
[clicks tongue] I do, quite.
My dad's a soldier.
But not the sort that takes
people's clothes away for no reason.
What sort, then?
[Bruno] Well, he's the important sort.
He's in charge of making
everything better for everyone.
So, is your dad a farmer?
No, he's a watchmaker.
Or was.
Most of the time now, he just mends boots.
It's funny how grown-ups
can't make their minds up
about what they want to do.
It's like Pavel.
Do you know him? Lives over there.
He used to be a doctor,
but gave it all up to peel potatoes.
[Bruno] Can I ask you another question?
What do you burn in those chimneys?
I saw them going the other day.
Is it just lots of hay and stuff?
I don't know.
We're not allowed over there.
Mama says it's old clothes.
Well, whatever it is, it smells horrid.
[chuckles softly]
[sighs] I wish
you'd remembered the chocolate.
Yes, I'm sorry.
I know. Perhaps you can come
and have supper with us sometime.
I can't, can I? Because of this.
But that's to stop
the animals getting out, isn't it?
Animals?
No, it's to stop people getting out.
Are you not allowed out?
Why? What have you done?
I'm a Jew.
I think I should go now.
Will you be here tomorrow?
I'll try. Goodbye, then!
Bye.
-[men singing]
-[door knocks]
Little present, sweetheart.
Thank you, Mummy.
-Have you seen Bruno?
-Outside on his swing, I think.
[Ralf] Yes, Thursday's perfect.
I'll have a car come to collect you both.
Are Grandma and Grandpa coming?
[Ralf] Mm-hmm.
Hey, did you smell that horrible smell
the other day?
Coming from the chimneys.
[Ralf] What sort of ill?
The day I fell off the swing.
Did you smell it, Mum?
-[Ralf] Father.
-Mum.
[Ralf] I… [sighs]
Let me speak to her.
[Ralf] Yes, she is. I can hear her.
[sighs]
Yes. We look forward to it. Goodbye.
[receiver clatters]
[sighs]
-Is Grandma not coming?
-No.
She's poorly, apparently,
but Grandpa's coming.
-Did you smell it, Dad?
-What?
[Bruno] That horrid smell
from the chimneys.
What is it?
[smacks lips] I think
they just burn rubbish there sometimes.
Look.
What?
-Hey!
-[Elsa] Gretel.
[chuckles]
Hey, that's not fair!
-Gretel.
-What?
It's only a game.
Ralf, this tutor you brought in,
does he usually teach children
as young as Gretel and Bruno?
I believe so. Why?
Well, do we know
what he's teaching them?
Gretel seems to have become so--
They're being taught
what all children are being taught
at the moment.
They mustn't get left behind.
Come on.
[kisses]
Let's get to bed.
"The Jew slandered us
and incited our enemies."
"The Jew corrupted us through bad books.
He mocked our literature and our music."
"Everywhere,
his influence was destructive,
the eventual result of which
was our nation's collapse, and then--"
Yes, Bruno.
I don't understand.
A nation's collapse
is all down to this one man?
The Jew here means the entire Jewish race.
If it had been just one man,
I'm sure something
would've been done about him.
There is such a thing
as a nice Jew though, isn't there?
I think, Bruno,
if you ever found a nice Jew,
you would be the best explorer
in the world.
[somber music playing]
[Liszt] Continue, Gretel.
[Gretel] "The aim of the Jew
is to become the ruler of humanity."
"The Jew is not creative,
but destructive."
"He is the enemy of culture."
"Thousands of Germans
have been made poor by the Jew."
[music fades]
[jet engine rumbling]
[Maria] Master Bruno.
What are you doing?
You've just had your lunch, haven't you?
I was going for a walk,
and I thought I might get peckish.
But don't make a mess of your satchel.
Bring it here.
I'll wrap it properly for you.
-[Bruno] No. It's none of your business.
-[footsteps approaching]
Bruno, what is it?
What are you doing with your satchel?
Herr Liszt gave us some books.
I'm going out on the swing to read.
Let me see.
-What?
-[Elsa] The books.
No.
Bruno, I just want to see what books
Herr Liszt has given you.
-I told a lie.
-What?
I've just got…
adventure books.
[sighs]
[kisses] Go on.
Off you go, then. [chuckles]
Now, Maria, there's two extra
for supper tonight.
Uh, the Kommandant's father will be here,
and I believe
Lieutenant Kotler is joining us.
[chomping]
[Bruno] Here.
[Shmuel grunting, panting]
[Bruno] What's the matter?
[grunts]
Don't throw it back.
What? Why not?
It's dangerous.
Dangerous? It's just a ball. Come on.
[tense music playing]
Do you not like playing?
[indistinct chatter]
Just not ball games?
Not here.
Tell me how the number game works.
I told you, it's not a game.
We just all have numbers.
-[whistle blowing]
-[gasps]
[man shouting]
-[soldier] Shmuel!
-Shmuel!
Bruno! What are you doing?
My ball went over.
I was just getting it back.
[sighs]
They smell even worse
when they burn, don't they?
What?
But surely you…
[music concludes]
[exhales] Elsa, I was sworn to secrecy.
-From your own wife.
-[Ralf] Yes.
I took an oath upon my life.
Do you understand?
Elsa, you believe in this, too.
-You want this country to be strong--
-No, Ralf, no! No, not that!
How can you--
-Because I'm a soldier.
-[Elsa] How can you?
-Soldiers fight wars.
-That isn't war!
It's a part of it!
It's a vital part of it!
-[sobs]
-The Fatherland we all desire,
all of us, you included,
cannot be achieved
without work such as this!
-Elsa. Elsa.
-Get away from me!
Get away from me! [sobs]
Grandpa's here.
-I don't believe this.
-[Bruno] Grandpa's here.
We'll be through in a moment.
Who told you about this?
How's Grandma?
Uh. She's… she's a bit
under the weather, I'm afraid.
It's a shame, she…
she was so much looking
forward to seeing you.
-Perhaps next time, if she feels up to it.
-[Matthias] Oh, absolutely.
You know, Ralf,
your mother really is sick.
She's been talking
about this visit for weeks.
Maybe that's what's made her sick.
[Matthias] So, your father tells me
that you've got a tutor.
Yes. He's nice.
[Bruno] But he won't let us read
any adventure books.
All we do is boring, old history.
[Matthias chuckles]
Let me tell you something, young man.
If it wasn't for history, we wouldn't all
be sitting around this table.
The work your father is doing here,
history in the making.
When I was your age,
history was my favorite subject by miles,
which obviously
didn't please my father.
Hmm? Why not?
Well, he was a professor
of literature at the university.
Really? Does he still teach?
-I don't really know.
-You don't… you don't know?
We're not in touch, my father and I.
He, um, left the country some time ago.
Really? When?
[smacks lips]
About four years ago, Herr Kommandant.
But surely, he can't be very old.
What is he,
still in his forties, late forties?
Where did he go?
-[tense music playing]
-[Ralf] Lieutenant Kotler.
Your father, the professor of literature,
where did he go?
I believe it was Switzerland,
Herr Kommandant.
[Ralf] How strange that he should choose
to leave the Fatherland
at the very moment it needed him most.
Just when we're all required
to play our part
in the national revival. More wine!
What reason did he give?
Was he tubercular?
Herr Kommandant?
Did he go there to take the air?
I'm afraid, I really don't know,
Herr Kommandant. You'd have to ask him.
[Ralf] Well, that would be rather
difficult, wouldn't it,
with him being in Switzerland? [scoffs]
-Come on!
-[table thuds]
What's the matter with you tonight?
Yes, perhaps that was it.
Perhaps he was ill.
Unless, of course, he had disagreements.
I mean, with government policy.
One hears of such men.
Disturbed, most of them.
Or just plain cowards.
-Even so, all of them traitors.
-[Ralf] Absolutely right.
Presumably, if that was the case
with your father,
you will have informed
your superiors, as is your duty.
Lieutenant Kotler.
-[whimpers]
-You cretin Jew!
Filth!
-[Pavel groaning]
-[Kurt grunting]
Ralf!
[Kurt] Jew!
[Bruno] Dad just sat there.
What did you expect him to do?
The Jew deserved it.
[music concludes]
Can I ask you something…
[sniffles] …about the farm?
Oh, Bruno, you don't still think
it's a farm, do you?
It's a camp.
Well, it's called a work camp.
For Jews, obviously.
Just Jews?
Because they're the best workers?
They're not in there
because they're good, silly.
They're no good at anything.
They're in there because they're evil.
-They're the enemy.
-The enemy?
-But I thought we were fighting--
-They're evil, Bruno.
Evil, dangerous vermin.
They're the reason we lost the Great War.
Haven't you been listening to anything
Herr Liszt has been telling us?
No. Not really.
[sighs]
Dad's not horrible, is he?
He's a good man.
Of course, he is.
But he's in charge of a horrible place.
It's only horrible for them, Bruno.
We should be proud of Dad,
now more than ever before.
He's making the country great again.
-[floor scrubbing]
-[tense music playing]
[music concludes]
[tense music playing]
[sighs softly]
[Elsa] Like you say,
they're a bit strange. A bit…
-Well, they're different.
-[Gretel] They're the enemy, Bruno.
Evil, dangerous vermin.
[Ralf] Well, you see,
they're not really people at all.
[music fades]
[soft music playing]
[chuckles softly] What are you doing here?
They wanted someone
with tiny fingers to clean all these.
We're not supposed to be friends,
you and me.
We're meant to be enemies.
Did you know that?
Do you want some?
-What's your dad like?
-What's he like?
Is he a good man?
You've never thought he wasn't?
And you're proud of him?
Aren't you proud of yours?
-Is it really horrible in the camp?
-[door opens]
[Shmuel gasps]
How dare you talk to people in the house?
How dare you?
-Are you eating?
-[Shmuel whimpers softly]
Have you been stealing food?
-Answer me!
-[gasps] No, sir.
He gave it to me.
He's my friend.
What?
[tense music playing]
Little man…
do you know this Jew?
Do you know this Jew?
No, I just walked in
and he was helping himself.
I've never seen him before in my life.
You, finish cleaning the glasses.
When I come back, we'll have a little chat
about what happens to rats who steal.
Come away.
[Bruno grunts]
[sniffles]
[music concludes]
[pants]
[dramatic music playing]
[insects chirping]
[cars approaching]
[music fades]
[narrator on projector]
New arrivals here are happy to discover
-[instrumental music playing]
-that life in the camp is not all work.
And that there's ample opportunity
for leisure also.
At the end of their day
at the ironmongery,
or the build or boot factory,
the workers can enjoy
the many forms of pastime
that the camp has to offer.
Organized sport is very popular.
Those that don't play
certainly enjoy watching.
At the end of the working day,
the centrally-located café
is the ideal place
for friends and families
to join together
for a hearty and nutritious meal.
The children in particular
enjoy the pastries
and cakes on offer.
[laughs]
[narrator on projector] In the evenings,
the occasional music concerts,
either by visiting orchestras
or indeed, by talented musicians
from within the camp itself,
are always well-attended.
Other recreations include
reading in the library,
pottery, cookery, art, and horticulture
for adult and child alike.
Almost any activity one could wish for
is available within the camp.
[music concludes]
[indistinct chatter]
-[Matthias] Bravo. Excellent.
-[Ralf] Thank you.
-[Matthias] Excellent.
-Congratulations.
-Thank you.
[instrumental music playing]
[indistinct chatter]
Goodbye, little man.
Shmuel! Shmuel!
[music concludes]
I don't understand.
I saw a film about the camp.
And it looked so nice.
I don't know why I did it.
Gretel and everyone
were saying all these things,
and that soldier's so scary.
Been coming here for days,
but you were never here.
I thought maybe…
we weren't friends anymore.
Shmuel, I'm really sorry for what I did.
We are still friends, aren't we?
[telephone ringing]
-[telephone ringing]
-[receiver clattering]
[Gretel] Where's Kurt these days?
I haven't seen him for ages.
Who's Kurt?
Lieutenant Kotler.
He's been moved to the front.
It was felt that his youth and enthusiasm
would be put to better use there.
Herr Kommandant, telephone.
In actual facts, Gretel, he was sent there
because he failed to inform
the authorities
of his father's
lack of loyalty to the party.
Which was his duty, I might add.
-Which was his bad luck.
-Bad luck?
Well, bad luck that it was his father
who was disloyal, and not his mother.
One presumably
doesn't have to report one's mother.
-[Ralf] What?
-When will Pavel be back?
Mum?
Never, stupid.
It's Father. They've been bombed.
Grandmother's dead.
[melancholic music playing]
[bell tolls]
"…The victory
which you have obtained for us,
and for all who sleep in him,
who are still in the body
in everlasting fellowship
with all that wait for thee on earth,
and with all
that are around thee in heaven,
in union with Him
who is the resurrection and the life,
who liveth and reigneth
with thee and the Holy Ghost,
ever one God, world without end. Amen."
He can't have that on there.
She wouldn't have wanted it.
He does.
[sighs]
[sobs softly]
[priest] "All mighty God,
who by the death of…"
[Bruno] Have you ever been to a funeral?
[music fades]
My grandma and grandpa
both died just after we got here,
but there weren't any funerals.
That one there to there.
They both died at the same time?
What of?
I don't know.
Papa said they must have caught something
on the way here.
They had to go to a hospital
as soon as we arrived.
We didn't see them again.
[sighs] This is fun.
Hmm. Wish we could do something
a bit more exciting, though.
[smacks lips] Ah. That one there to there.
This one?
-This one?
-No, that one.
-This one to here?
-No, there!
-[chuckles] To here?
-[chuckles] No!
-[Bruno] Here?
-No!
-[soft tender music playing]
-[both chuckle]
I don't want you to go away again.
No. Neither do I.
[music fades]
[Ralf] You can't behave like this!
[Elsa] You're questioning my behavior?
-[Ralf] It can't continue!
-[Elsa] I know.
[door opens]
[Elsa] I can't stay here
and be a part of this.
[Ralf] Don't you think
there will be questions?
-[Elsa] Questions?
-[Ralf] Well, what does it say
about my ability to carry out my work
if I cannot control my own family?
-[Elsa] Work? Is that what you call it?
-[Ralf] I do.
-[Ralf] Just ignore it.
-[Elsa] Right. Just ignore it.
[Elsa] Ignore it. Ignore the fact
that the man I married is a monster!
Even your own mother couldn't love you.
Are you happy here?
Yes. Very.
And you, Gretel?
Well, I was, but I do miss home.
-I miss my friends.
-Yes, I'm sure.
And you too, Bruno.
You must miss those friends of yours, hmm?
No. Not anymore, really.
I suppose the real question
is if the opportunity arose,
would you prefer to live somewhere else?
[Gretel] Back home?
No. Not Berlin. Not yet.
Somewhere safe. Say, uh,
Aunt Lottie's in Heidelberg,
for example.
All of us? You as well?
No. That won't be possible
just yet, I'm afraid.
I must stay and complete my work here.
[sighs] See, at the moment,
your mother is finding it…
She just feels, right now,
you need to spend some time elsewhere.
Would you like that?
I'm afraid, Bruno,
in life, we often have to do things
we don't want to do.
The important thing
is your mother does not feel
that this is an appropriate place for you
to be spending your childhood.
And the more I think about it, the more
I realize she's very probably right.
-But, Dad--
-No!
It's time for you to move away.
[wheelbarrow thuds]
Is everything all right?
We can't find Papa.
He went on a different work duty
with some of the men,
and they haven't come back.
[sniffles]
I've got some bad news, too.
I'm going away.
How long for this time?
[Bruno] That's why it's bad.
It's forever, I think.
Mom says this is no place for children,
which is just stupid.
-When do you go?
-[Bruno] Tomorrow. After lunch.
So, I… I won't ever see you again?
[Bruno] Yes, you will.
You can come on holiday
to Berlin, if you like,
when everybody's getting on
with each other again.
I wish I could've helped you
find your dad.
I really want to make up
for letting you down like I did.
That would have done it, wouldn't it?
Helping you find your dad?
Would've been great.
Like a secret mission.
[pensive music playing]
I could dig under.
[Shmuel] What? With that?
-No, but I could bring something.
-You don't want to come over here.
[sand crunching]
[Bruno] Look.
[grunts softly]
I could come through to your side.
What's the point in that?
Your dad's not going
to be over here, is he?
But I'd stick out, though,
wouldn't I, if I came through?
-I don't look like you.
-[whistle blows]
-[men shouting]
-You could look like me, though.
If you dressed like me,
and shaved your hair off.
I'm not shaving my hair off.
You could cover it with a cap.
-My pajamas are a different color.
-I could bring some.
There's a hut full of them.
Thousands of them.
Would you do it, though?
-I want to do it.
-Would you dare do it, though?
-I want to help you find your dad.
-I've got to go.
Tomorrow, then?
I'll bring an extra-big sandwich.
And don't forget the pajamas!
[insects chirping]
[birds chirping]
[Elsa] Bruno?
Mum, can I go and play on the swing?
-[sighs] Bruno…
-It's my last chance.
[sighs] All right. Go on then.
[pants]
I thought you weren't coming.
I'm sorry. It wasn't easy to get away.
I'm not meant to be out here today.
You forgot the pajamas!
-Did you bring the sandwich?
-Would I let you down?
Oh.
[music continues]
[groans]
Here.
How do I look?
[thunder rumbling]
Right. Let's get going.
[shovel thuds]
[music fades]
[tense music playing]
Bruno?
[Shmuel] That's enough.
[shovel clangs]
[grunts softly]
[both pant, chuckle]
Let's go and find your dad.
Come on!
Master Bruno?
[dog barking]
[thunder rumbling]
[Bruno] Shmuel.
-Can we go to the café or something?
-[Shmuel] Café?
-Maybe I should go home.
-But what about Papa?
Yeah.
We'll check our hut first.
Bruno?
[music continues, intensifies]
Come on.
[flies buzzing]
[man coughing]
Papa?
-[soldier 1] Up! Up! Get up!
-[gasps]
-[men clamoring]
-What's happening?
-I don't know. We go on marches sometimes.
-[soldier 1] You, move! Up, up!
-Come on! Up, up! Up!
-[men clamoring]
-[soldier 2] Come on!
-[soldier 1] Up!
-Come on!
-[barks]
[men clamor]
Bruno!
He must still be outside somewhere, ma'am.
Bruno?
Move! Get up! Quickly!
-[indistinct chatter]
-[groans, gasps]
[man] Get up.
-[both groan]
-[man 1] Get up. You must!
-Move them out!
-Move!
-[indistinct chatter]
-[gunshot]
-[Bruno whimpers]
[men groan]
[barks]
[Ralf] Which means
that our weekly capabilities
would be almost trebled.
So, therefore,
by the end of the summer--
-Ralf.
-Elsa, I'm in a meeting.
Bruno's missing.
[grunts]
Come on!
-[door thuds]
-[dog barks]
Wait here.
-[thunder rumbling]
-[men clamoring]
[Bruno] Come on! [grunts]
[soldier 1] Move! Move!
[soldier 2] Fall out!
[groans]
Join the queue!
[soldier 2] Move!
Move!
[breathing heavily]
[soldier 4] Come on, you!
[thunder rumbling]
[men groan]
Bruno!
Move it!
[indistinct chatter]
[soldier 5] Go on.
Bruno!
[indistinct chatter]
It's all right.
I think we're just waiting in here
until the rain stops.
[soldier] Clothes off!
[men clamoring]
[man] Deliveries will be cancelled.
No, it's just a shower.
-A shower?
-[man] It's just a shower.
[indistinct chatter]
-[soldier] Herr Kommandant!
-[dog barks]
[men clamoring]
[Ralf] Open the gates! Open the gates!
Move!
[men clamor]
[music intensifies]
[men clamoring]
-[switch clicks]
-[men screaming]
[men screaming in fear]
[hatch lid closes]
-[door pounding]
-[muffled screaming]
Stop!
-[music builds]
-[dogs barking]
[flies buzzing]
[music swells]
[music stops abruptly]
[rain pattering]
Bruno!
[yell echoing]
[breathes heavily]
[sobs]
[yells in desperation]
[sobs intensely]
[Elsa yelling and sobbing]
[screams and sobs forcefully]
[sobbing]
[screams] No!
[melancholic music playing]
[music concludes]
[instrumental music playing]